.TH PMENU 1 "630 MTG"
.SH NAME
pmenu \- program the 630 MTG Windowproc Button 2 menu
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B  pmenu
.RB [ \-f " file]"
[ \-c ] [ \-C ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\f2Pmenu\f1
will program the Button 2 windowproc menu for the layers
window it is invoked in.
\f2Pmenu\f1 reads a configuration file (\f2.mtgmenurc\f1 or the file
specified by the \f2\-f\f1 flag) that describes the menus to be added.
Each line of the configuration file consists of three arguements:
.ftCW
.ti +5
.br
depth "item" "string"
.br
.ft1
\f2Depth\f1 can have values from 0 (the top depth menu) to 3 (three levels down) and
describes where the item is to be placed.
Quotes must enclose both the \f2item\f1 and \f2string\f1 fields.
The \f2"item"\f1 field
will be printed as an entry in the menu at that
depth. The \f2"string"\f1 field
are the characters that will be transmitted to the
host when the corresponding \f2"item"\f1 is selected with the mouse and
Button 2.
A \f2\\n\f1 placed in the \f2"string"\f1 field
allows a newline to be transmitted to the host.
When Button 2 is used to select an item either a string is transmitted
to the host or a sub-menu is displayed.
.PP
\f2Pmenu\f1 creates menu entries in the order they appear in the configuration
file. When a line in the configuration file
at depth n is followed by one at depth n+1, the depth n
item becomes a pointer to the a sub-menu with the depth n+1 item as the top
entry. Any \f2"string"\f1 bound to the depth n item will be ignored.
When a line in the configuration file at depth n is followed by one
at depth n-1, the depth n-1 line is placed at the end of the menu that
contains the pointer to the depth n sub-menu.
For example the following is a valid configuration file:
.nf
.ftCW
.in +5
.br
0 "vi"
1 "up" "k"
1 "down" "j"
1 "left" "h"
1 "right" "l"
0 "rlogin"
1 "ucsd"
2 "sdcc7" "rlogin sdcc7\\n"
2 "sdcc10" "rlogin sdcc10\\n"
1 "berkeley"
2 "monet" "rlogin monet.berkeley.edu\\n"
2 "okeeffe" "rlogin okeeffe.berkeley.edu\\n"
2 "ucbvax" "rlogin ucbvax.berkeley.edu\\n"
.br
.ft1
.fi
.in -5
.PP
This creates a pointer \f2vi\f1 to a sub-menu with four entries in it,
and a pointer \f2rlogin\f1 to a sub-menu with pointers to two sub-menus.
.PP
The command-line options are:
.TP 8
.BI \-f " file"
Specifies that "file" be used as an initial configuration file
instead of the default "$HOME/.mtgmenurc" file.
.TP 8
.B \-c
Specifies that all menus added to Button 2 in this window be cleared before
reading the configuration file.
.TP 8
.B \-C
Specifies that all menus added to Button 2 in this window be cleared (the
configuration is not read).
.PP
See the 630 Multi-Tasking Graphical Terminal User's Guide for more information
about programming the Windowproc Button 2 menu.
