.\" use "-rZ1" for exptools
.tr ~
.if \nZ=0 .ds x} XTAGENT 1 layers
.if \nZ=1 .ds x} AGENT 1 EXPTOOLS
.TH \*(x}
.SH NAME
.if \nZ=0 xtagent
.if \nZ=1 agent
- send agent calls to a layers terminal
.SH SYNOPSIS
.if \nZ=0 .B xtagent
.if \nZ=1 .B agent
[-clav] agentcall|"!com"|"&com" [chan|- [up to 4 args]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.if \nZ=0 .B Xtagent
.if \nZ=1 .B Agent
sends agent commands to a 5620/630/730 to manipulate windows.  Many of the
agent commands are similar to the commands on the terminal's button 3 menu.
The agentcall can be a number as defined in "agent.h"
.if \nZ=0 (in $DMD/include)
.if \nZ=1 (in $TOOLS/lib/agent/include)
or can be one of the names listed below.  Only the first
character of an agentcall name is significant except for commands that are
two "words"; in that case the first character of both words are required.
For example, NEWLAYER requires both an 'N' and an 'L'.  Case in an
agentcall name is insignificant.
.PP
The channel number defaults to the current window if missing but is required
if extra arguments are required for the call.  A channel number of '-' also
defaults to the current channel.  Channel numbers are assigned
sequentially starting at 1 for the initial window on a 630/730, and you can
use the -c option (see below) to find out a channel number of a window.
.PP
Here are the available agent calls by name.
.IP "CURRENT" 3
Make the window current.
.IP "DELETE" 3
Delete the window.
.IP "TOP" 3
Pop the window to the top.
.IP "BOTTOM" 3
Push the window to the bottom.
.IP "NEW" 3
Create a new window so that the upper left hand corner is at the X, Y
coordinates specified as the first two extra arguments and so that the
lower right hand corner is at the X, Y coordinates specified as the next
two extra arguments.  Coordinates are the same as those specified in a
"layers -f" file.  The passed-in channel number is ignored and a free
channel is selected by the terminal.
.IP "NEWLAYER" 3
Exactly like NEW except no shell is created to run in the new window.
.IP "MOVE" 3
Move the window so that the upper left hand corner is at the X, Y
coordinates specified in the extra arguments.
.IP "RESHAPE" 3
Reshape the window; arguments are the same as for NEW.
.IP "EXIT" 3
Exit layers.
.IP "ROMVERSION" 3
Return the rom version of the terminal.
.IP "!com" 3
Execute shell command "com" in a window.  If window coordinates are given,
this behaves just like a NEW but the shell command is executed in it
instead of $SHELL.  As in the "layers -f" file, the last command in "com"
should be invoked with "exec".
.IP "&com" 3
Exactly like "!com" except that
.if \nZ=0 .B xtagent
.if \nZ=1 .B agent
doesn't wait for the command to exit.
NOTICE: character-xt-driver based layers does not know that this new process
is associated with the target window, so deleting the target window will not
kill this process.  Use "!com" so
.if \nZ=0 .B xtagent
.if \nZ=1 .B agent
will kill the command when 
.if \nZ=0 .B xtagent
.if \nZ=1 .B agent
itself is killed. This has the desired side effect of killing the command when 
layers is exited, but has the unfortunate side effect of killing the command
if the originating window is deleted.  If you run
.if \nZ=0 .B xtagent
.if \nZ=1 .B agent
in the background, this will still work.
.PP
The following agentcalls are available only on 730 terminals running
.BR 730windows .
See
.BR 730windows (1)
for information about parameters to these agentcalls.
.IP "CREATESCREEN" 3
Create a new screen.
.IP "DESTROYSCREEN" 3
Destroy current screen.
.IP "NEXTSCREEN" 3
Jump to the next screen.
.IP "PREVSCREEN" 3
Jump to the previous screen.
.IP "NEWHOST" 3
Initialize a new host.
.IP "EXITHOST" 3
Exit a host.
.IP "TILELAYER" 3
Change window into a small box (iconify).
.IP "UNTILELAYER" 3
Restore window from the small box (uniconify).
.IP "HOSTDIALER" 3
Set a host dialer.
.IP "DIALRESET" 3
Rest a dialer.  Used by
.BR 730setdial (1).
.IP "DIALCONCAT" 3
Add 8 bytes to a dialer string.  Used by
.BR 730setdial (1).
.SH OPTIONS
.IP "-c" 3
Print out the channel number returned from the terminal to standard output.
This is useful when doing a NEW to determine which channel was selected.
You can also use
.if \nZ=0 .B Xtagent
.if \nZ=1 .B Agent
-c by itself (except on old versions of pseudo-tty layers) to determine the
channel number of the current window.
.IP "-l" 3
Determine if on logged-in layer and return true or false.
.IP "-a" 3
Print out the response in ascii.  This is the default for ROMVERSION.
.IP "-v" 3
Verbose mode, for debugging.  Prints out what is sent and received in
the agent call.
.SH EXAMPLES
.if \nZ=0 .B Xtagent
.if \nZ=1 .B Agent
is particularly useful from within the "layers -f" startup file on a 630/730
to be able to re-use channels that are freed up by downloaded programs.
Here is a sample from one of those startup files:
.br
.nf
~~~~8 960 64 1016 exec dmdlock -u
.br
.if \nZ=0 ~~~~56 480 968 900 echo "please wait";sleep 55;xtagent NEW 1 32 32 944 452;xtagent NEW 1 32 504 944 924;xtagent MOVE 1 56 56;xtagent CURRENT 1;exec $SHELL
.if \nZ=1 ~~~~56 480 968 900 echo "please wait";sleep 55;agent NEW 1 32 32 944 452;agent NEW 1 32 504 944 924;agent MOVE 1 56 56;agent CURRENT 1;exec $SHELL
.PP
To create a window, run "mailx" in it, and delete the window when
mailx finishes:
.br
.if \nZ=0 ~~~~CHAN=`xtagent -c NEWLAYER 1 32 32 944 452`
.if \nZ=1 ~~~~CHAN=`agent -c NEWLAYER 1 32 32 944 452`
.br
.if \nZ=0 ~~~~xtagent "!mailx" $CHAN
.if \nZ=1 ~~~~agent "!mailx" $CHAN
.br
.if \nZ=0 ~~~~xtagent DELETE $CHAN
.if \nZ=1 ~~~~agent DELETE $CHAN
.fi
